---
title: Wireguard, Tailscale, Cloudflare - The holy trinity
image: zerotrust.png
img_path: /images/
date: 2023-11-03
categories: [homelabbing]
tags: [wireguard,vpn,cloudflare,tailscale,tunnel]
pin: false
comments: true
---

The usefulness of a homelab can be greatly extended by giving yourself or others access to it remotely. In this article we will take a look at some of the ways to manage your homelab on the go.

## Types of connections

I wanted to cover 3 main types of connections that I've encountered while homelabbing. Each certainly has their pros and cons and I want this article to be short and succinct. Below you will find a summary of each type of connection and how to set it up.

## Wireguard VPN

Wireguard was the VPN that popped my encryption cherry. In the open source world Wireguard is pretty much the gold standard. It's easy to setup, and the security of the code is highly vetted. In essence, WireGuard exchanges cryptographic keys between the client and the server. When a user initiates a connection, the client and server exchange public keys, and using these keys, they can be compared against the private keys, and establish a secure tunnel. This tunnel encrypts and encapsulates data packets, ensuring that they remain confidential and secure during transmission. WireGuard's simplicity and minimalistic design contribute to its speed and reliability, making it a popular choice for homelabbing on the go. Let's look at setting it up in the most basic form of a server providing an entry point, and clients connecting on that subnet.

I apologize this guide is in the process of being edited.

Soon to come:
- Setting up Wireguard
- Cloudflare tunnels
- Tailscale Overlay
